.TH LOCALFIRST-RCPTCHECK 8 "2026" "dsmr-localfirst" "DSMR mail stack"
.SH NAME
localfirst-rcptcheck \- SMTP-time recipient validator for hybrid system/vpopmail domains
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B RCPTCHECK=/var/qmail/bin/localfirst-rcptcheck
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B localfirst-rcptcheck
is a qmail-smtpd
.B RCPTCHECK
program. It validates each recipient at SMTP time, accepting system identities
on hybrid domains that vpopmail's
.B chkuser
would otherwise reject. The recipient is read from the
.B RECIPIENT
environment variable; the verdict is signalled by exit status (0 accept,
100 reject \(-> 550, 111 temporary \(-> 451).
.SH DECISION LOGIC
.TP
.B Domain not in rcpthosts
Accepted. The recipient is a relay target; relay permission is enforced earlier
by authentication and tcprules. The validator never rejects a non-local domain,
so authenticated submission to external addresses is unaffected.
.TP
.B Domain in locals
A system (locals) domain is delivered to system accounts only; qmail-send never
routes it to vpopmail. It is validated against the system layer alone: accepted
if the local-part is a system identity (a real
.I /home
user, a qmail extension of one with a matching
.IR .qmail- *
file, or a
.IR ~alias/.qmail
alias \(em see
.BR system-identity (8)),
otherwise rejected. There is no vpopmail fallthrough.
.TP
.B Domain in localfirstdomains
A hybrid (vpopmail) domain. Accepted if the local-part is a system identity (see
.BR system-identity (8));
otherwise the vpopmail check below applies.
.TP
.B Other local domain
A pure vpopmail domain. The vpopmail recipient check applies.
.PP
The vpopmail check shells out to
.IR ~vpopmail/bin/vrcptcheck .
Because that tool cannot distinguish an unknown user from a backend outage
(both yield its exit 1), an absent result triggers a TCP liveness probe of the
vpopmail SQL backend (host and port read from
.IR ~vpopmail/etc/vpopmail.pgsql ):
a confirmed outage is deferred (451) and logged at
.B LOG_CRIT
to the mail facility, never permanently rejected. If
.B vrcptcheck
is not installed at all, the host has no vpopmail layer (a system-only
deployment) and an unknown local recipient is rejected.
.PP
On acceptance, control is handed to the next
.B RCPTCHECK
program if one is installed (by default
.IR /var/qmail/bin/rcptcheck-overlimit ,
the outbound relay throttle), so both checks share qmail's single
.B RCPTCHECK
slot.
.SH CONTROL FILES
.TP
.I /var/qmail/control/locals
One domain per line; qmail's system (locally-delivered) domains. Recipients on
these domains are validated against the system layer only, with no vpopmail
fallthrough. A line beginning with a dot matches subdomains.
.TP
.I /var/qmail/control/localfirstdomains
One domain per line; the vpopmail domains for which system-first resolution
applies. A line beginning with a dot matches subdomains.
.TP
.I /var/qmail/control/rcpthosts
Consulted to distinguish local domains from relay targets. Leading-dot wildcard
entries are honoured;
.I morercpthosts.cdb
is not consulted.
.SH SECURITY
A recipient whose domain is not in
.I rcpthosts
is never rejected, preserving relay for authenticated submitters. A local-part
containing
.RB \(oq @ \(cq
on a local domain is rejected, since it cannot name a system account and would
be mis-parsed by the downstream existence check.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR localfirst-dispatch (8),
.BR system-identity (8)
