.TH LOCALFIRST-BACKEND-MONITOR 8 "2026" "dsmr-localfirst" "DSMR mail stack"
.SH NAME
localfirst-backend-monitor \- out-of-band vpopmail SQL backend liveness check
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B localfirst-backend-monitor
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B localfirst-backend-monitor
probes the vpopmail SQL backend and notifies root and postmaster once when it
becomes unreachable and once when it recovers. It is run on a schedule from
.IR /etc/cron.d/dsmr-localfirst .
.PP
When the backend is down,
.BR localfirst-rcptcheck (8)
defers (451) vpopmail recipients rather than rejecting them, and logs
.B LOG_CRIT
to the mail facility. This monitor turns that condition into a single,
rate-limited alert instead of a per-recipient message storm: it never injects
mail per deferred recipient, which would only worsen a degraded MTA.
.PP
The backend host and port are read from the first non-comment line of
.IR ~vpopmail/etc/vpopmail.pgsql
(credentials are never read). The alert is delivered to the system aliases
root and postmaster via the local
.BR sendmail ,
which is routed by qmail-local and does not consult the vpopmail backend, so it
is deliverable during an outage. State is tracked in
.IR /run/localfirst-backend-monitor.state
so each up/down transition alerts exactly once.
.PP
On a host with no vpopmail backend configured the monitor exits quietly, so it
is harmless on system-delivery-only hosts.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SQLCONF
Path to the vpopmail SQL connection file (default
.IR /home/vpopmail/etc/vpopmail.pgsql ).
.TP
.B RECIPIENTS
Space-separated alert recipients (default "root postmaster").
.TP
.B TIMEOUT
Seconds to wait for the backend TCP probe (default 3).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR localfirst-rcptcheck (8)
