.TH SYSTEM-IDENTITY 8 "2026" "dsmr-localfirst" "DSMR mail stack"
.SH NAME
system-identity \- test whether a local-part is a mail-eligible system identity
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B system-identity
.I LOCALPART
.RI [ DOMAIN ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B system-identity
evaluates the shared eligibility predicate used by the DSMR system-first
recipient routing for hybrid system/vpopmail mail domains. A local-part is a
mail-eligible system identity when qmail itself would deliver it locally rather
than bounce, restricted to
.I /home
accounts and the alias user. Resolution follows qmail's own address handling:
the longest dash-delimited prefix of the local-part that names a real
.I /home
account (see
.BR qmail-getpw (8))
is the controlling user and the remainder its qmail extension. A bare user is
always deliverable; an extension is deliverable only when a matching
.IR .qmail- extension
file or one of the
.IR .qmail- ...\& default
catch-alls exists (see
.BR dot-qmail (5)).
An unresolved local-part is deliverable when the alias user has a matching
.IR ~alias/.qmail- LOCALPART
or catch-all (the local-part lowercased and each
.RB \(oq . \(cq
translated to
.RB \(oq : \(cq,
matching qmail-local's filename rules).
.PP
When that alias catch-all is a
.RB \(oq "| fastforward " cdb \(cq
program (see
.BR fastforward (1)),
the catch-all does not deliver every address: fastforward bounces any recipient
absent from
.IR cdb .
.B system-identity
reproduces that verdict by validating the recipient against
.I cdb
directly \(em trying the same targets fastforward does
.RI ( LOCALPART @ DOMAIN ,
.RI @ DOMAIN ,
and
.RI LOCALPART @)
\(em so an unknown recipient is reported as not a system identity (and is thus
rejected at SMTP time) rather than accepted and later bounced.
.I DOMAIN
supplies the host for those lookups; omit it to probe with the host-independent
.RI LOCALPART @
target only. A
.B \-p
pass-through fastforward, or a
.I cdb
that cannot be read, leaves the plain deliverable verdict unchanged.
.PP
It is the same predicate consulted by
.BR localfirst-rcptcheck (8)
at SMTP time and by
.BR localfirst-dispatch (8)
at delivery time, exposed as a command so an administrator can verify how a
given recipient will be classified.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
The local-part is a system identity; it is printed on standard output and the
matched clause (passwd or alias) is noted on standard error.
.TP
.B 1
The local-part is not a system identity (resolution falls through to vpopmail).
.TP
.B 2
Usage error.
.SH NOTES
Service accounts (whose home directories are not under
.IR /home/ )
and uid 0 are deliberately excluded, so a virtual recipient that merely collides
with a system login name is not treated as a system identity. This is the
stack's hybrid-safety narrowing of qmail-getpw's home-ownership test, applied
identically at SMTP-validation and delivery time so the two never disagree.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR localfirst-rcptcheck (8),
.BR localfirst-dispatch (8),
.BR fastforward (1),
.BR newaliases (1)
